Hello and welcome to this Python tutorial.
Alright, so we are about to make the last function
of this class RBM.
This last function is about the contrastive divergence
that we will use to approximate the likelihood gradient.
And so before we implement it
I think it would be good to remind us what it is
and to do so we'll go back to that paper
that I introduced to you in the first tutorial.
So here is the paper,
and let's go to section five,
approximating the RBM log-likelihood gradient.
Alright, so as you understood, contrastive divergence
is all about approximating this log-likelihood gradient.
Because remember, the RBM is an energy-based model.
That means that we have this energy function
that we are trying to minimize.
And since this energy function
depends on the weight of the model,
that is, you know, all the weights in this tensor of weights
that we defined at the beginning.
Well, we need to optimize these weights
to minimize the energy.
And not only it can be seen as an energy-based model
but it can also be seen as a probability graphical model.
In that case, the goal,
and that's the equivalent to minimizing the energy,
the goal is to maximize the log-likelihood.
The log-likelihood of the training set.
And as for any deep learning model,
or machine learning model, well to minimize the energy
or to maximize the log-likelihood
we need to compute the gradient.
And as you understood,
the direct computations of the gradient are too heavy
and therefore, instead of computing it directly,
we are gonna try to approximate it.
And thanks to these gradient approximations,
well each time we make these tiny adjustments
in the right direction,
that is the direction of the minimum energy.
Because you know we're trying to minimize the energy.
So that's a little bit like before
where you knew we were trying to minimize a loss function
and through stochastic gradient descent
we were updating the waste
in the direction of this minimum loss.
Only here the computations are too heavy
to compute these gradients directly
and so we need to come up with another solution,
which is to approximate these gradients.
And the algorithm that will allow us to this
is contrastive divergence.
And we already mentioned it, this comes with Gibbs sampling.
Gibbs sampling consists of creating this Gibbs chain
in k-steps and this Gibb chain in created exactly
by sampling K times the hidden nodes and divisible node.
That is that, you know, we start with our input vector,
V zero, then based on the probabilities PH
given V zero, we sample the first set of nodes
so that's at the first iteration.
Then we take these sampled hidden nodes as input.
Let's call them H one to sample the visible nodes
with the probabilities PV given H one
and then again we use these sample visibile nodes.
Let's call them V one, to sample again the hidden nodes
with the probabilities PH given V one
and then again we sample the visible nodes
and we sample the hidden nodes
and we do this K times.
And that's exactly what this CDK algorithm is about.
The algorithm is just below,
that's the algorithm of k-step contrastive divergence.
OK, and so now what we're gonna do
in this last train function of the RBM class
is that we will simply implement these three lines here.
And so in this training function we will simply update
our tensor of weights, W,
our bias B,
and our bias A.
While here in the paper it is called C, the C Is,
but in our algorithm we call them A.
That's the bias of PH given V.
Alright, so let's do this and let's go back to Python.
So, we defined this new function that we call train
and this train function is gonna several arguments.
So the first one is, as you might have guessed, self,
because we will update the tensor of weights
and the bias A and B
that are variables specifically attached to the object.
So we need to take our object here with self
and then we are gonna add four more arguments,
which are gonna be first our input vector
that I'm calling V zero,
so that's our input vector containing the ratings
of all the movies by one user.
And then you know we will make a loop over all the users,
but here we're working with one user so far.
And then the second more argument is going to be VK,
so that's the visible nodes obtained after K samplings.
You know after K round trips from the visible nodes
to the hidden nodes first
and then way back from the hidden nodes
to the visible nodes.
So that's the visible nodes obtained
after K iterations and K contrastive divergence.
And then we're gonna add as argument PH zero
and that's the vector of probabilities
that at the first iteration the hidden nodes equal one
given the values of V zero,
that is, our input vector of observations.
And then we're gonna take
PHK,
that will correspond to, of course, the probabilities
of the hidden nodes after K sampling
given the values of the visible nodes, VK.
Alright, so that's our five arguments
and now call in and let's go inside the function.
So basically now what we have to do is very simple,
we can just do exactly as what is done
in these lines eight, nine and ten.
We will first update our tensor of weights, W
then our bias B
and then our bias A
exactly as what is given here.
So, let's start with the weight of dates.
So we have to take our weights again
and then add the product of VJ zero,
that is the rating of the movie J
and the probabilities that the hidden nodes equal one
given the values of this input vector V zero.
And then we subtract the probabilities
that the hidden nodes equal one after K iterations
given the values of the visible nodes
still after K iterations that multiply by VJK.
That is the value of the visible node
corresponding to the movie J after K iterations.
Alright, so let's do this.
We're basically gonna do the same as what is given here.
Alright, so first we take our tensor of weights, self dot W
and then since we have to take it again and add something,
we're gonna use this trick, this shortcut.
That is plus equals,
and basically that's the same as doing self dot W
equals self dot W plus something.
Only here we just have to add the plus something.
Alright, so then we have to make the product
of the probabilities that the hidden nodes equal one
given the input vector, V zero
by that input vector V zero.
And this probability that the hidden nodes equal one
given the input vector V zero
is nothing else than PH zero.
So what we do here is
we take our torch library
then dot then MM,
you know, to make the product of two tensors,
and in the parenthesis we input
the two tensors in that product.
And so that is first V zero,
the input vector of observations
and then we have to think to transpose
just to make things mathematically correct
and then the second element of this product
is as we said,
PH zero.
Alright, perfect.
And then we need to substract again
the torch product
of the visible nodes obtained after K samplings
and that is VK
and again we need to take the transpose
and the probabilities that the hidden nodes equal one
given the values of these visible nodes VK.
And this probability is nothing else than PHK.
So, we input here as the second argument of the product,
PHK.
Alright, and we have our first update in that KCD algorithm
that is in our contrastive divergence technique.
Alright, now let's take care of the second update.
So remember, the second update was about the weight B.
And remember B is the bias of the probabilities PV given H
and so let's go back to the paper.
Here it is.
So now it's more simple than before.
First we take our B again, of course,
and then we add the difference between VJ zero,
that is the original rating of the movie J by the user
and VJK.
That is the visible node obtained after K samplings.
Alright, so very easy, let's go back to Python.
So self B, then plus equals
because we're adding something to B
and then in here I'm just going to use a trick.
I'm gonna take the torch sum
and I'm going to sum what we want to add to B,
that is, remember it's V zero
minus VK.
You know, the difference between
the input vector of observations
and the visibile nodes after K samplings.
V zero minus VK.
And to that I'm gonna add zero.
I'm just making the sum of V zero minus VK
and zero and that, as you might have guessed,
is just to keep the format of B
as a tensor of two dimensions.
Alright, and then the last update
concerns our other bias, A
that, remember, contains the bias of
the probabilities PH given V.
So let's update that, self dot A.
Then plus equal because we're gonna add something as well.
And if we go back to the paper
we see that, again, we need to add the difference
of this time, not VJ zero and VJK
but the probabilities that the hidden nodes equal one
given the values of V zero, the input vector of observations
and the probabilities that the hidden nodes equal one
given the values of VK, that is,
the values of the visible nodes after K sampling.
Alright, and we have these guys here because
these are our arguments of our train function.
This is PH zero
and this is PHK.
So basically what we have to do is just add the difference
PH zero minus PHK.
And we are gonna use the same trick
to take the sum of
PH zero minus PHK
and zero.
So I'm just copying that and pasting it here and here
instead of having V zero minus VK
we'll have PH zero
minus PHK.
And now congratulations, our RBM class is over.
We now have what's at the heart of the RBM algorithm,
that is, our sampling functions, sample H and sample V
plus our training function that we'll do
to contrast the divergence solution with Gibbs sampling.
So congratulations,
because that was not an easy class to make,
but now the good news is that we made the most difficult
because basically what we have left to do is,
of course to create a object of this RBM class.
This will be our model in itself
and then we will train it over several epochs
so that we find these optimal weights
that will alow us to predict the ratings of the movies
that were not originally rated.
OK, so before we move on to the next tutorial
let's select all this, which will create our RBM class.
So let's press command and control plus enter to execute
and here we go.
Now we have our class
and we can use it to create several objects.
So we can create several RBM models.
We can test many of them with different configurations,
that is, with several numbers of hidden nodes
because that's basically the main parameter.
But then you can add some more parameters in your class,
for example, a learning rate
if you want to improve and tune your model.
Alright, so let's create this RBM object
in the next tutorial and until then enjoy deep learning.